---
layout: post
title:  "On dynamic thinking"
date:   2025-09-02 10:19:32 +0200
categories: Findings 
published: false
---
I’ve been wondering lately about the nature of human’s thinking. It seems to me when we approach any sort of consideration, both on past, present or future events, that our thinking can be categorized either as static or dynamic.

I derive these terms from statistics (regression) and economics, and perhaps it’s a classification I’ve made myself without any grounding, but bear with me. Static thinking can be seen as considering a situation as either being or not being, without any change taking place in the moment or influences impacting the situation. An example I might use from life is that of relationships, it might be that when we consider our personal efforts to get a girlfriend, we look at it as a roadmap of which the finish line is being in a relationship. In this paradigm, we will then perhaps think ‘I need to get fit, I need a modicum of social status, so and so hobbies where I can meet people, and so on’ and then because we have this resume of traits that are evaluated highly by the other sex’s key performance indicators, we eventually meet someone we will court and get into a relationship with. The courting itself is then an even more intricate extension of this gaming of the KPI’s. Then once we’re in the relationship, we don’t need to do anything anymore because all these actions we’ve taken were in the spirit of finding a partner. I’m not saying this is how people approach romance, but with life being ever so busy, it often does resemble such a scenario, where people who are in the relationship see the relationship as a static threshold being crossed. Both participants have their busy life, and settle into a co-existing partnership where the evaluation of the other’s attractiveness erodes in the background.

Dynamic thinking, on the other hand, considers the changing nature of events, the dynamic between a situation and others causing one or the other to change. The idea is that you consider past achievements’ effects (being in a relationship) not as a static event, but that you see situations as constantly changing. You need to keep courting your partner for a fulfilling relationship. 

I posit that people are actually quite bad at adding nuance to situations, turning the static view that impressions leave with us into a dynamic whole that represents reality better. This distinction between static and dynamic thinking can be applied to many areas of life: personal, business, education, and so on. 

Education:
When I was 18 I started a bachelor (and later master) Business Administration at KU Leuven in Belgium, a program that aims to bridge theory and practice to streamline business students for the real world. I started out in this overwhelmed by all the information I was supposed to study and get into my head, but through experiencing the cycles of courses and their supposed aims, I started realizing there’s so many holes in their methods it’s difficult to really claim you’re turning into a ‘master’ of business at all. What’s being done is turning you into a master of cramming information into the brain, and this isn’t the goal of education. Intuitively this study process didn’t sit right with me, so I made it a personal goal to read as many books, either on history, biographies, philosophy, biology, you name it (but mostly biographies in the beginning). What I realized was that the education system as it’s brought to us today is ill with the virus of static dogma (that is, situations are expected to be studied without questioning or proving their need for being). I’m currently traveling Scotland and while reading passages of Epictetus, the following stood out to me and provided a sort of Aha-Erlebnis: “Getting an education means learning to bring our will in line with the way things happen - which is to say, as the ruler of the universe arranged. He arranged for there to be summer and winter, abundance and lack, virtue and vice - all such opposites meant for the harmony of the whole” (book I 12 On Satisfaction). Elsewhere in the discourses he writes about the uselessness of spending all of your time reading books (trying to retain information) and nothing else. There is a distinction between education and studies (as taught in Universities nowadays). Education is about forming the mind, training it to be able to fall into any situation and dissect events and make nuanced judgements based on limited information. The backbone of an education is virtue and understanding how nature works, distinguishing what’s in line with natural law and what goes against it. It’s not about being able to recite IFRS standards or typical business strategy models, but about being able to start from nothing, a single piece of information about an unfolding situation, and training the reasoning abilities to develop business instincts. 

An example of this idiocracy was a course called environmental economics. The instructor was a professor with loads of publications and a full handbook, which is a rarity for the lazy generation striving to give as little information - powerpoint slides - and expect you to magically recite anecdotes and theories based on hunches given in the slides. This course was about how to make the economy function in such a way that maximizes benefits for the environment. So far so good, who doesn’t want nature to blossom while building empires? My problem with this course was the way in which it was brought to us, a fashion I blame many other courses for as well. When you think about environmental economics, and how not to harm nature in the process of doing business, you’re talking about incentives, which businesses are assumed not to have. The solution to the problem is that the governments keep a close eye on all that is produced or demanded in order to mathematically minimize environmental harm. This is what the whole course was about, outlining methods for governments to reduce harm, either through quotas, taxes, subsidies etc. At no point in the course is it questioned whether we want to have an economic mechanism that’s under full control of government, no mention at all about consequences for society and innovation from such a regime. I believe it’s Schumpeter and Milton Friedman who handle these topics well. Nevertheless, my issue lies with the way this course, and many alongside it, assume a situation to be statically driven: what do we want? Less pollution, what’s the easiest way to create this situation in a controlled manner (as that way you can take credit)? Government intervention. A lot of problems in the world come from this very tendency actually, but more on that another day.

Business: 
This isn’t the only course with such problems. Growing up I had the idea of business as being about competition, making products that no one else thought of or could make in a way you did (think Porter’s cost leadership, niche product or uniqueness). It’s a place where people still waged war, but with their minds, where survival wasn’t to be interpreted in the literal but is in the intellectual sense. First semester of Business Administration: Micro-economics claims monopolies should be seen as the worst thing in the world, something leading to inefficiencies and suffering (high prices, unemployment). A very static viewpoint indeed. In a business setting, when starting a company, the sole purpose of a businessman should be to become a monopoly, set prices the way you wish, dominate the market and have excess profits you could invest as you see fit (obviously for many this would lead to an sinful lifestyle). This is the perfect form of success. Whether this is best for society in the long run? Likely not, as the cost of this situation is highest for the consumer, who pays more than they otherwise would. But it shouldn’t be seen as static. A nice example here would be the case of Standard Oil of New Jersey, the conglomerate John D. Rockefeller founded by practices that are commonly referred to as the Cleveland massacre. He would make deals with the railroads to have his oil shipped at quite low price, make it able for him to sell way more and have more income, and then go to competition and explain to them that he can do it so much cheaper, basically undercutting them, and offer to take them over. Once takeover is finalized, economies of scale grow even larger, and a cycle continued until Standard Oil owns the market. Such practices are now illegal, and probably for the better, but what if it wasn’t illegal? What if there were times it’s legal to do anything to further you company you can think of (except of course physical harm)? The transformation of the oil industry because of Rockefeller’s monopolization went from very rudimentary to much safer practices while also enabling a very high innovation rate (enabling less waste and better applications). What if you allow period’s of such competition, and once a final monopoly is established, a single intervention is made to repeat that precious process of competition that leads to innovation? Kind of like the trust busting attempts by Theodore Roosevelt but implemented differently so that actual competition ensues, taking into consideration incentives as a first priority.
